---
layout: post
title:  Making Classical Signatures Post-Quantum - The Blog Post
---

This post is still **under construction**. Furthermore, it is aimed at a general audience. If you want to hear about the technical details, go see the associated [project](https://lauranemarco.github.io/projects/1_project/). Any feedback is welcome. 


###  Bitcoins, quantum computers and digital signatures

Everyone by now has heard of cryptocurrencies. They have risen as a non-negligible part of the financial markets, and become somewhat of a hot topic across several fields. But what interests us here isn't to discuss whether you should invest or not in cryptocurrencies. 
What interests us is to have a closer look at how they work. We will in particular focus on Bitcoin, because the way the transactions are made is of particular interest to us. 
When you are a Bitcoin user, you are in possession of a key pair, made of a public and private key. Your private key will be used by yourself to sign transactions when you want to transfer bitcoins to another account. Your public key will be used to verify the validity of the signature associated to each transactions and will also serve as an address for user who want to send you funds. As indicated by its name, your public key should be publicly available to anyone. Actually, when a user first creates their account only the *hash*[^1] of their public key is published and not the public key itself. This hashed public key is what we call a user address. You might wonder, why don't we publish the public key directly, if it is meant to be public anyways ? 

Well, as one might or might not have heard, another hot topic in tech is so-called quantum computers. They are computers based on physics principles that are predicted to outperform all of current computers. More importantly, when we eventually manage to construct one that is sufficiently powerful, an important part of the cryptography that we rely on today [^2] will be broken. For example, anyone in possession of a quantum computers would be able to forge a digital signature, and say steal all of your bitcoins by fake-signing a transaction that would transfer all of your funds to their account. This sounds dreadful. What are the researchers doing ? Why don't we yet have a solution ? 
Well, first of all, we are working on it. The NIST, the US institute for the standardization of technologies launched in 2016 a call for proposals for so-called *post-quantum cryptography*, i.e. cryptography that would resist to quantum computers, in a effort to find a suitable replacement for our current standards. This standardization process has now entered its third round, and a standard is expected in the upcoming years. 

But what can we do in the meantime ? Well, our second observation is that in the case of Bitcoin transactions for example, it might not be as terrible as it seems. But to explain that, we need to get a bit more technical for a while. 
The majority of public-key cryptography (i.e. the kind of cryptography where each user possesses a private and a public key, such as the signatures that we talked about) relies on (instances of) two problems : the discrete logarithm problem which consists of the problem of computing the logarithm of a number with respect to a basis. The number belongs to something that resembles to a finite version if the integers with some additional stucture (we call that a *finite group*). The other problem is the factorization problem and  it is much simpler to explain: given a big number, find its prime factors. By saying that these problem are hard, we mean that given that some conditions are met (e.g. the number to factor is sufficiently big) in the majority of cases they can't be solved within a reasonable time on current computers. For example, a 2048 bit modulus i.e. 617 digits long number that factors into two distinct primes is estimated to take more than the current age of the universe (14 billion years) to factor according to RSA Labs. 

Both of these problems are broken when given access to a quantum computer. In our particular case, the digital signature used in Bitcoin is ECDSA, and without caring about the details, if you can solve the discrete logarithm problem, you are able to recover the secret key with good probability by only observing the public key and making some computations. This means that you would then be able to sign anything on behalf of the secret key owner, against their will. However, if you remember, we said that you actually don't directly publish that public key but rather hide it in a way behind a hash function, by publishing only the output called *hash*. And this actually gives some sort of protection against quantum computers. 
Quantum computers might be more powerful than current ones, but they are still not powerful enough to break hash functions in the same way that they break the factorization of discrete logarithm problem. 
Therefore, as long as you only publish the hash of your public key, you are safe. But there's a small catch: when you have signed a transaction and you release it, you have to publish your public key along with it to allow other users to verify the validity of that signature. 
This means that from now on, your private key is vulnerable to a quantum attack and you can't use it anymore. But do not despair, there's a quick fix: you can just sample a new key pair every time you make a new transaction to avoid reusing any key pair. 
So it seems that it would be a quick fix to make Bitcoin transactions resistant to quantum computers : a user should just never re-use a key pair. 

### Digital signatures and the advantage of going threshold 

We will now diverge for a bit from hash functions, and talk about digital signatures in general. As their name indicates, digital signatures are algorithms that allow you to digitally sign a document. More precisely, a user possesses a public-private key pair. They sign a message using their private key, and the validity of the signature on this message can be verified by any other user by using their public key. Signatures are considered secure if they are *existentially unforgeable under chosen message attacks*, this means that a malicious user that can observe the public key and ask to get signatures for messages of his own choice isn't able to create a valid signature on a new message. I.e. no matter how many things you sign, as long as your secret key doesn't leak you are pretty safe. *As long as your secret key doesn't leak* though... or as long as you don't forget your own secret key (because then, in the context of cryptocurrencies you would lose access to your account and all the funds associated to it.. doesn't sound too good!). This shouldn't happen too often if you store your keys in a secure and reliable way, but ideally we would like to have a way to mitigate this threat. 

This is where threshold cryptography, and more precisely threshold signatures, kicks in. 
Threshold signatures allow to create keys in such a way that a threshold *t* of users is required to sign a specific message, and no set of less than *t* users can produce a valid signature on a message. This is quite practical is the setting of cryptocurrencies. You can use a threshold signature scheme to disperse your keys over several devices. For example, you have a signing key for your phone, another for your laptop and a last one for your home computer. If the threshold for signing is say *t=2*, then it means that you can allow for one of your keys to be compromised or lost, without losing access to your account and your funds. In fact, if you realize that the key of one of your devices has been compromised, you can create a new address with associated new, non-compromised keys, and transfer the funds to your new address by signing a transaction using the two non-compromised keys. 
I hope that I have convinced you of the advantages of threshold signatures. 

Now what we would want to have is a digital signature that combines the practical advantages of threshold signatures, while still hiding the public key in the same way as for simple signatures to resist the threat of quantum computers. 
